# Laplace's Angel

I decided sometime ago to try and not offer unsolicited advice to anyone (and be careful to not offer it in most cases even if I'm explicitly asked). This was not easy to do. Offering advice, particularly when it seems valuable and **reflects well on oneself** is quite mentally rewarding - consequently, I don't know how well I've done with regard to this maxim but I will continue trying.

Why do this? Because like most people I don't really **know** much despite having some shreds of knowledge gift-wrapped in my personal opinions. This idea is not original by any means. It rests on the shoulders of what's been described as the problem of induction by Karl Popper. In another form, it's been called the Black Swan by the prickly Taleb. But I think it goes even further - we don't know even when we know better sometimes.

At present, I have decided that the fundamental unknowability of life is actually a good thing, at least in part. It is an angelic facet of existence that fights against the frightening possibility of [Laplace's demon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laplace%27s_demon). Simply put, knowing everything would just be no fun. I will try to organize some thoughts about my personal epistemics in what follows (perhaps even making a mental note of the current state of the world, and my assumptions about its trajectory so that I can visit back to review and self correct and reveal even more flaws - like most of what I write, this is a living document that will likely change over time).

## The Many Opinions of Sports Fans

It's nice to start a discussion about epistemics with something that inspires high passions but is ultimately low stakes (except for the participants perhaps) - Team sports are an interesting phenomenon and fertile ground for compelling stories to emerge. I grew up watching cricket and football (soccer) and heard with great fascination, the theorizing of family and friends as to why a team does not perform well: Lacking squad selection, deficiences in man management, bad assessment of conditions (typically relevant to cricket pitches), the wrong formation (in the setup of the playing eleven around a football pitch), team chemistry, players with a bad attitude and lacking work ethic, and so on.

You can pick your favorite story, and will be lauded in your social circles if the story you picked was compelling enough to justify your prediction in retrospect. I read [a book about money-balling football](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/17465493-the-numbers-game) that tilted me the other way briefly - from intuitive stories and causal explanation to statistics as a revealer of truth, but even here the authors drift into being a little too sure of their methods. One point they make is compelling though; the results in most sports, and football in particular, are in large part determined by luck when the resources, fitness, and skills of teams are within fine margins of each other.

My current prespective is that the success of teams is cyclical (similar to market cycles). Teams that have ample resources to buy the most talented players, hire the most talented coaches, nutrition and health experts, statisticians and tacticians, will do well - losing some and winning some when they meet teams of the same means within competitions. The resources the teams have are largely dependent on social, cultural, economic, and even political factors (for example the rise of foreign backed teams in European soccer in the 2000s). Of course even this more general hand-wavy model is limited - the system is too complex to be modeled. At some point in the future, I plan to expand on this by exploring the statistics related to club football (there's a few datasets on Kaggle that look promising).

## Investors Don't Know Anything (Mostly?)

At first I read about genius investors and success coaches. This is how most people start, by hearing about the legendary investing prowess of Warren Buffet and contemplating how his multi-decade effort and practices for managing a several-hundered-billion dollar enterprise can be used to drive similar results for one's personal portfolio. Then I read about random walks and the efficient market hypothesis (EMH). This led to a period during which I thought there's information around to give you an edge but that it dries up amongst the flurry of smart-money-flash-boy-quants so EMH mostly stands with exceptions. Finally I was exposed to the ideas of Taleb and watched enough documentaries about financial crises to realize that even EMH can be hogwash - you can mine efficiency and lack of turbulence from any system for a time before the tide changes dramatically.

The markets, like most emergent phenomenon, are [complex adaptive systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complex_adaptive_system). When behaving themselves, these systems seem cyclical. [There is even a combination of monetary and fiscal policy that may work in concert to engineer the cherished soft-landing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PHe0bXAIuk0). However, they seem to buck prediction for the most part, and trying to stabalize them too much leads to the inverse over time - violent swings, and aggregation (culminating in too big to fail actors within the system) which actually strips the system of the properties that make it resilient (I have not read [Antifragile](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antifragile_(book)) yet but I imagine Taleb dives into this with more wit and obnoxiousness than I am right now). Like most people, I am not in a position to dictate policy so my only option for the moment is what Taleb refers to as [a barbell strategy](https://www.wealest.com/articles/barbell-strategy) with some caveats. In a nutshell, invest conservatively, or in my case aggressively but without a risk of leverage induced blow-up in generally reliable financial instruments while repeatedly attempting to gain exposure to events with violent upside potential.

A final note on whether or not complex adaptive systems can ever be understood well enough to make accurate predictions - probably not but I think there are tools emerging that make understanding these system more tractable. We live in a time where compute is becoming abundant and modeling simple actors within these systems and running simulations allow some level of empiricism to combine with all the theorizing that is typical in these disciplines. [Thomas Simon's economy simulator](https://thomassimon.dev/ps/4) is a great toy version of this approach in action. [The work of Doyne Farmer and others in forecasting macroeconomic trends using agentic simulation techniques seems like an interesting path forward here](https://www.inet.ox.ac.uk/publications/no-2024-06-forecasting-macroeconomic-dynamics-using-a-calibrated-data-driven-agent-based-model).


## Doctor's Don't Know Anything (Sort Of?) And The Power Of Anecdotes

RFK Jr. is the Secretary of Health and Human Services now (as of writing, 02/2025) so it is surely time to expose all the fraud in medicine. That's the extreme version of the conspiracism and hysteria that plagues most discussion about health. Like markets, geological, ecological, and biological system as networked, complex adaptive system that are difficult to reasons about. Advice about nutrition is dominated by anecdote - I've seen use of Homeopathy, Ayurveda, Acupuncture, Chinese Medicine, fad diets, and at one point, a psuedo-scientific Bio-Disk product being pushed by an MLM within my social circle. So what we do we really know about health and medicine?

It's true that modern medicine (referred to pejoratively as allopathy in parts of the internet - though the definition seems non-offensive) has its faults. There are market actors with bad incentives but assuming we could remove those - practice based medicine with theories that are rigourous and falsifiable seem like the best solution to treat serious ailments. At the same time we can rely on what has been established as close to factual (with variance and allowances for people's personal preferences):

* Have a varied diet and consume things in moderation (or zig-zag between starvation, and heavy meals - this may have some benefits and people who are huge fans of "the wisdom of nature" love stuff like this. It lets them approximate the natural environment of their hunter-gatherer ancestors. I see no harm in such practices but more on the lionization of the natural and the old-fashioned later).
* Don't consume stuff that's outright dangerous - radioactive materials, cancer causing substances, etc.
* Limit consumption of anything that leads to accumulation of carcinogens - alcohol, cigarettes, etc.
* Prefer natural foods - for the unnatural ones, limit their consumptions unless there has been a long history establishing high consumption as safe.
* Unless seriously ill, don't pop a lot of pills - antibiotics may wreck your gut biome and lead to bacterial resistance, pain relievers mess with your endocrine and brain chemistry so tough out the pain if you have a mild fever or viral infection.
* Despit what you read on the internet, get vaccinated, especially when the vaccine in question has been administered to hundreds of millions of people.
* Exercise in a way that's sustainable and enjoyable - run a lot, or ski, or play team sports, or lift a lot of heavy weights - maybe a combination of all of these kinds of activities?

My sense is that all of this advice is non-controversial and would even be endorsed by doctors. Like investing, a barbell-ish strategy that seeks to minimize risk when things are good (the risk being death) and maximize reward when one is really sick (the reward being life) seems pretty sane. So what's all the hoopla about? Well, given that the human is a complex adaptive system in miniature and that some humans have complex conditions that cannot be readily explained by modern medicine (doctors themselves will admit their diagnoses are best effort guesses based on current medical literature and lack of knowledge), some have a default state of existence that is grave and cannot be treated by following the standard advice.

I sympathize with those that suffer from any manner of psychosomatic, auto-immune, or other wholly mysterious diseases that cannot be explained or treated. These folks often turn to the reward maximization end of the barbell and understandibly so. You don't know what can fix your condition so you try everything - radical diets, alternative medicine. Miraculously, in some cases a strange combination of practices can even fix the underlying condition - unfortunately this is where we slide into bad epistemics. When accupunture suddenly cures and unbreable chronic pain, one does not explore the nuanced facts of the situation and that some unknowably complex interaction could have fixed the issue. No, the just cured person becomes emotionally attached to the last practice that delivered them from pain and will often adopt it as part of their lifestyle and even become a massive advocate of it. And this simple phenomenon seems to be the root of all the bad epistemics I have encountered in this domain - induction from a sample of one (or sometimes several) anecdotes.

## What To Write About Next?

I will have more to say about my personal epistemics and what I read regarding all of this in upcoming sections I plan to write:

* **Politicians Don't Know Anything (But Still, Try To Elect Good Ones)**
* **Executives Don't Know Anything (But Some Are Quite Lucky)**
* **I Don't Know Anything**



